When I was applying for the Mozilla Fellowship for Science in July, I found the blogs by the 2015 Fellows, such as <a href="https://practicaldatamanagement.wordpress.com/2016/06/22/reflections-my-ride-on-the-mozilla-fellow-ship/">Christie Bahlai's</a>, really useful. In that spirit, here is my application from the 2016 cycle. I am happy to talk to anyone who is considering this fellowship next year! I'll start with the application questions and end this post with the text of my cover letter.

<strong>What research fields are you in? (25 words)</strong>
I am a neuroscientist and cell biologist who is passionate about improving research practices and science policy for the future of science.

<strong>What is your research focus? (50 words)</strong>
I study the demyelinating peripheral neuropathy Charcot Marie Tooth 4B2, a disease caused by the loss of a protein with an unknown function. I am working to understand the basic biology behind this disease using genetic knock-out models, cell culture, molecular biology, virally-mediated genetic manipulations, and fluorescence and electron microscopy.

<strong>Describe to us your current research team. (50 words)</strong>
My research team includes cell and molecular biologists, neuroscientists, myelin biologists, as well as fluorescence and electron microscopy specialists. My lab is currently a small group (4 people) but we collaborate within our institution and globally. My open science advocacy partners include faculty, students, librarians, and open source community members.

<strong>Describe to us how open science advances your research. (100 words)</strong>
Through years of research in neuroscience labs, I’ve seen cultural and technical barriers stand in the way of open science and data sharing. Until recently, I thought this was how science worked. After learning about the open science movement, I began teaching myself tools to ensure my work is transparent, reproducible, and archival. Meetups in the local open source scene empowered me to learn to code. Code literacy has been transformative for my scientific practice in terms of efficiency, reproducibility, and data management. I’m not an expert, but I seek out resources and try to teach as I learn.

<strong>Are you leading any projects related to open science? (100 words)</strong>
Open Insight PDX - Hands-on workshops and interactive discussions designed to bolster coding skills and introduce scientists to national and international leaders in the open science and open source communities. Events included Collaboration with Git and GitHub, Data and Doughnuts roundtable with Phil Bourne (NIH Data Science Director), Mark Hahnel (Figshare), Bastian Greshake (OpenSNP).

Science Hack Day PDX - 48 hour event that will facilitate collaborative projects between Portland’s scientist, open source, designer, and maker communities.

Rstats for n00bs - Workshop designed for small data scientists who are new to coding. Covers installation of R-studio, importing data, exploring data, and basic statistical tests.

<strong>How do you see Mozilla advancing your work? (50 words)</strong>
Scientists need education around workflows and resources that make open science practices an easy investment. Good tools exist, but they are not typically taught during scientific training. Support from Mozilla will help me move new ideas into labs by eliminating the tool-barrier and hacking the culture to encourage open practices.

<strong>What do you see as the opportunities for impact around open research at your university? Could you leverage this opportunity in a potential
project? (50 words)</strong>
There are labs on campus with potential to become open champions. They attend open science discussions and hands-on open tool workshops, but they don’t have consistent open policies and practices. I can provide support to identify and overcome barriers to openness, and create case studies for developing open champions.

<strong>What do you think needs to change most immediately in scientific research? (100 words)</strong>
Culture. Scientific culture moves slowly. To keep their jobs and maintain labs, investigators buy into the existing system and train their students to do the same. I can’t count the times I’ve been told “That’s the way science works” as justification for secrecy, biassed processes, nonsensical assessment structures, and other cultural constructs that have little do with scientific inquiry. It is more efficient, reproducible, and impactful to work openly. All scientists want to be efficient, reproducible, and impactful. We need to leverage this to instigate broad cultural change towards open science.

<strong>What project in the field do you find most inspiring to further science and the web? (50 words)</strong>
I am inspired by ASAPbio’s use of education and outreach to get biologists to use existing preprint infrastructure. High profile champions were created at the ASAPbio meeting and preprints have now been posted from several historically secretive labs. This project’s strategy is pushing scientific culture towards openness and web-based resources.

<strong>Why is the the open web important to you? (25 words)</strong>
The open web is the future of science. Scientific methods and data now live online, but only the open web enables accessibility, transparency, and reproducibility.

<strong>Cover letter (1 page)</strong>
Hello Mozilla Fellowship for Science application review team!

I am motivated to contribute to the open science movement because it is faithful to the potential of what science can be — working openly enables scientists to be more collaborative, reproducible, accessible, and impactful. My scientific training has taken place in neuroscience wet labs that conduct the basic cell biology on which our understanding of the brain is based. During my 8 years of experience, I have seen cultural norms stand in the way of open science. As a result, I’ve worked for cultural change through practical user focused education (R is better than that expensive proprietary software!) and big picture discussions on the future of data. I am applying to the Mozilla Fellowship for Science to develop open educational resources and catalyze cultural change in science.

The future of science is Open, but the perceived cost of entry is high. Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU) needs support to “level up” researcher code literacy, data management, and sharing practices through programs relevant to both small data wet labs and big data dry labs. I am uniquely positioned to be that support. As a PhD student, I have worked at OHSU to develop programs to kickstart the conversation on open scientific practices, teach code literacy, and facilitate the use of tools that enhance reproducibility and transparency. Through the Open Insight series and other collaborations, I’ve organized events that challenge research scientists to both learn open tools (e.g., hands on web app development for scientists, Git and GitHub, Rstats for n00bs, Science Hack Day PDX), and think deeply about the context of their work and life span of their data (e.g., discussions with thought leaders). My experience at OHSU allows me to leverage Mozilla’s expertise to make the practice and philosophy of openness relevant and tangible to my peers.

I have hosted hands on events that engaged scientists at the individual researcher level, and revealed labs that are interested in open practices, but who are not yet open champions. For example, the Git and GitHub workshop I organized drew 70+ people from diverse labs, including 14 from one group. This lab wanted to use Git, but not everyone knew how, so they had been emailing code back and forth. The workshop was successful, but I don’t have the resources to provide followup support. Did they incorporate Git and Github into their workflows? With the support of OHSU and Mozilla, I can work with this and other labs to facilitate the sustainable adoption of open tools and practices. The Mozilla Fellowship for Science will enable me to reduce the barriers to open science by providing hands on training at the individual level, developing labs into champions of open practices through on-campus support, and building case studies of how open champions are made.

By working with a cohort of likeminded fellows and the wider Mozilla community, I hope to learn effective strategies from open source and other scientific fields to implement effective educational and outreach programs that support cultural change at my home institution. Mentorship at OHSU from Dr. Allison Fryer, Associate Dean of the Graduate Studies, along with Robin Champieux, Scholarly Communication Librarian and open science advocate, will provide access to student and researcher populations across OHSU and develop my leadership skills.

As a community organizer at OHSU, I understand how to hack the culture to catalyze change — but I need support and mentorship from Mozilla to take my work to the next level. With this support and that of my home institution, I will be in a strong position to make an impact at OHSU and beyond. I’m thrilled for the opportunity to work with the Mozilla team. Thank you for considering my application.

